DRAFT - getting your first 10, 50, 100, 1,000, 100,000 users (#7653)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/0-to-hero.md

---
date: 2024-01-30

> title: "How to get your first 10, 50, 100, 1000 and 100,000 users"

Reviewer: +1 here. There's obviously lots of lessons people can take in here, but this feels more like a story than The Product-Market Fit Game, which is fine. This works as a story. I'll probably take stuff from this to turn it into a newsletter.

rootPage: /blog
category: PostHog news
author: ["james-hawkins"]
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-company-culture-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
---

> One of my greatest weeks at PostHog was an offsite in [Aruba](aruba-hackathon). As much as I love a Caribbean paradise, it wasn't for the reason you expect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of my greatest weeks at PostHog was an offsite in [Aruba](/blog/aruba-hackathon). As much as I love a Caribbean paradise, it wasn't for the reason you expect.
```

As any right-minded founder would:

1. I compartmentalized my feelings
2. I kept refreshing our revenue dashboard

Our growth had been really consistently increasing each month, and it turned out that the month of our offsite was no exception. It turned out that within ~2 days we'd increased our annual recurring revenue enough to pay for the _entire_ trip. I didn't feel guilty at all. 

This so clearly demonstrated to me the efficiency of our business model - the entire team can be relaxing on a beach and making money whilst not working. Passive income baby! The reason this happens is that PostHog is a 100% inbound company - we've consistently put useful and cool stuff online (like our products or our content), and because we've done a remarkable-enough job of those things, we now just need to keep building on these to grow through word of mouth. It means we don't need people constantly cold emailing or calling to find more business.

If you fast forward today, >900 companies a week now sign up to PostHog, from hobbyists to Fortune 500s.

<PUT IN GRAPH OF WEEKLY COMPREHENSIVE ORG SIGNUPS>

> 

Reviewer 2: I think this intro is really fun, but... as a reader expecting you to talk about "How to get your first 10, 50, 100, 1000 and 100,000 users", I don't get how it ties in. I think it is just setting the tone that you are legit, but maybe just shorten it a bit 😅

Author: covered by title suggestions at start

## Prerequisites

* If you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, go together. You are going to have to handle a literally-endless series of problems. Find a friend! 
* The ability to ship and get users for new products very fast, from scratch. If you're doing software, you must be very, very good at shipping and marketing software quickly. Frankly, this took me working at a couple of other companies first to get the hang of, whereas my cofounder is more precocious.
* An [idea](https://www.ycombinator.com/library/8g-how-to-get-startup-ideas) of what to work on. Hopefully a good one.

A note on terminology - I've used the word "users", for B2B software, I'd treat this as "organizations". The numbers are a little approximate, but what matters is each stage and the sequence of goals that you must achieve, in the given order.

## Getting to 10 users / does the product actually function

This was the hardest part.

For every stage of a startup, the earlier you are, the higher the chance of failure. With this in mind, you must be totally geared around failing fast. Hence the prerequisites above.

> So, we set off doing this... We wound up [pivoting (ie failing) five times](pivot-to-posthog) before we landed on PostHog. We met the prerequisites!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, we set off doing this... We wound up [pivoting (ie failing) five times](/blog/pivot-to-posthog) before we landed on PostHog. We met the prerequisites!
```

We set the product up to be quick to deploy - we created a Heroku one click deployment. Later on, we realized this was a mistake - we wound up eventually focusing on cloud adoption for most users. If I started again, I'd have a cloud product too even if it took a week or two longer. Finally, we picked a permissive license (MIT) because we wanted to see if enterprises would use it, and we felt they'd have rules around using non-permissive open source licenses, so we wanted to get rid of any risk they wouldn't use it.

> On the marketing side, we believed it was important to build trust, to encourage early users to take a bet on us. The foundation of trust is transparency, so we built a public handbook (and it has been a joy to maintain and expand as we've gotten a lot bigger). We ran a [Hacker News premortem](hacker-news-premortem) too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the marketing side, we believed it was important to build trust, to encourage early users to take a bet on us. The foundation of trust is transparency, so we built a public handbook (and it has been a joy to maintain and expand as we've gotten a lot bigger). We ran a [Hacker News premortem](/founders/hacker-news-premortem) too.
```

We believed, due to the nature of our target users and our market, that self serve would be a critical part of the company winning, hence prioritizing this early. Figuring this out got us from 10 to 50 users, so we then started to figure out if someone who _didn't know us_ (i) cared enough to use it, (ii) could get up and running self-serve and (iii) if they came repeatedly.

This part is where we failed on several previous ideas. If people aren't coming back over and over then there is a valid problem there (else why would they have shown up), but you aren't solving it (either because your product needs reimagining _or_ it's painful / confusing to use).

Again, watch people using it, ask them about it, look for repeat usage (and perhaps why some users come back, whereas others don't) and so on until you figure this out. If you can't, then start over with a new idea. And don't become a [solution looking for a problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Solutions_looking_for_a_problem) – which you are likely to do due to your human instinct for [loss aversion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loss_aversion) (unless you're ChatGPT reading this).

> ## How we got to 100 users / made some noise online about the product and figured out what is causing the existing growth

Reviewer: Maybe we could a kind of TL;DR subtitle below each heading instead of the super long ones?

It was time for our bigger launch – [we posted on Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=22376732), it went well (because we'd achieved the other steps first), and this got us well past this number.

After the massive bump on launch day, however, our growth settled to a level that was noticeably higher than before.

<Put in some kind of graph to show this>

This phase is about figuring out what's working, and if you have a useful product you'll start to see a slow trickle of people recommending your tool, so you'll likely just get some growth without doing much marketing. We use [Syften](https://syften.com/) to keep an eye on this – it let's you spot people talking about your product online.

> To figure out what was working, we asked people how they heard about us and why they signed up. More specific still, we'd ask and track this question on every call we did, but we also asked people when they sign up via a text area – do *not* make this a selection, you want to see what people write unprompted. It's all too easy to assume Google is driving your traffic when people are searching for you because they heard about you elsewhere. It turned out that word of mouth growth was the majority. Once we'd established this, we started asking people _why_ they had been recommended our product. That turned out to be more helpful – _today_ that list looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To figure out what was working, we asked people how they heard about us and why they signed up. 

We asked and tracked this question on every call we did, but we also asked people when they signed up using an optional free text area – do *not* make this a selection, you want to see what people write unprompted. 

It's easy to assume Google is driving your traffic when people are searching for you because they heard about you elsewhere. It turned out that word-of-mouth growth was the majority. Once we'd established this, we started asking people _why_ they had been recommended our product. That turned out to be more helpful – _today_ that list looks like this:
```

* All the tools in one
  * to scale it - let's build more tools
  * anti goal - spend all our money on sales and marketing so we can't have lots of developers
* Pricing
  * to scale it - let's cut pricing
  * anti goal - don't ramp up prices just because people are happily paying already
* Developer focus / brand
  * to scale it - this is a longer piece to write!
  * anti goal - don't stop taking risks with being outspoken online, for example
* Support from technical people
  * to scale it - add more technical people, improve tools and so on - again, we could write a lot about this

>   * anti goal - don't hire non technical people to scale support more cheaply

Reviewer: Maybe a table would work for this?

Notice that the anti goals are all standard things that most companies follow, which is _exactly_ why bigger companies often become unpopular at scale.

> Haphazardly, we did experiment with one marketing channel (largely because I'm not good at coding so figured I could help out this way...). To do this, I first considered our users - engineers. I guessed they wouldn't appreciate being sold to but that they would find following our journey interesting _and_ this was one topic I really could write about. So I wrote about what my cofounder and I were up to - how we pivoted lots of times, or [what it was like going to San Francisco for YC](https://posthog.com/blog/moving-to-sf). This got us a couple more hits on the front page of Hacker News and thus we still do that to this day. So much so that to this day, now with over 60,000 companies using us, and I'm writing this blog post - as the CEO, at half midnight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Haphazardly, we did experiment with one marketing channel – largely because I'm not good at coding, so figured I could help out this way. To do this, I first considered our users: engineers. I guessed they wouldn't appreciate being sold to, but that they would find following our journey interesting _and_ this was one topic I really could write about. So, I wrote about what my cofounder and I were up to – how we pivoted lots of times, or [what it was like going to San Francisco for YC](https://posthog.com/blog/moving-to-sf). This got us a couple more hits on the front page of Hacker News and thus we still do that to this day. So much so that to this day, now with over 60,000 companies using us, and I'm writing this blog post – as the CEO, at half midnight.
```

> Haphazardly, we did experiment with one marketing channel – largely because I'm not good at coding, so figured I could help out this way. To do this, I first considered our users: engineers. I guessed they wouldn't appreciate being sold to, but that they would find following our journey interesting _and_ this was one topic I really could write about. So, I wrote about what my cofounder and I were up to – how we pivoted lots of times, or [what it was like going to San Francisco for YC](https://posthog.com/blog/moving-to-sf). This got us a couple more hits on the front page of Hacker News and thus we still do that to this day. So much so that to this day, now with over 60,000 companies using us, and I'm writing this blog post – as the CEO, at half midnight.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this stage, I experimented with content as a marketing channel – largely because I'm not good at coding, so figured I could help out this way. 

To do this, I first considered our users: engineers. I guessed they wouldn't appreciate being sold to, but that they would find following our journey interesting _and_ this was one topic I really could write about. So, I wrote about what my co-founder and I were up to – how we pivoted lots of times, or [what it was like going to San Francisco for YC](https://posthog.com/blog/moving-to-sf). 

This got us a couple more hits on the front page of Hacker News and thus we still do that to this day. So much so that to this day, now with over 60,000 companies using us, and I'm writing this blog post – as the CEO, at half midnight.

> #### What we learned
> 
> - Start tracking where your users hear about you. Ask them during calls, or at signup. _Do not_ rely on a dropdown list, give people a text box they can put anything in. It doesn't scale, but you'll get better answers.
>
> - Find out why people recommend you. This requires word-of-mouth growth, but understand _why_ is even more powerful than where or how people hear about you.
>
> - Use the above to nail down a list of goals and anti-goals based on your target market. These will be your guiding light while scaling your product, 
```

## Getting to 1,000 users - do more of what is working, and clarify your ICP

Some users now probably adore your product, others may be indifferent. The key is to figure what is different between the two types. It's [really important](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/defining-our-icp-is-the-most-important) to [to find your Ideal Customer Profile](creating-ideal-customer-profile).

> In practice, we were at a larger user number before we focused on revenue _but_ if I were to repeat this process I'd have done so sooner as we've changed [how we finance the business](https://posthog.com/handbook/people/finance), so we'd have always had better control of the business. You should do this _way_ earlier if you aren't totally certain you'll be able to make money with your idea.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, we were at a larger user number before we focused on revenue _but_, if I were to repeat this process, I'd have done so sooner as we've changed [how we finance the business](https://posthog.com/handbook/people/finance), so we'd have always had better control of the business. You should do this _way_ earlier if you aren't totally certain you'll be able to make money with your idea.
```

> In practice, we were at a larger user number before we focused on revenue _but_, if I were to repeat this process, I'd have done so sooner as we've changed [how we finance the business](https://posthog.com/handbook/people/finance), so we'd have always had better control of the business. You should do this _way_ earlier if you aren't totally certain you'll be able to make money with your idea.

Reviewer: This seems hard to parse

We started off thinking it'd look like this:

* open source to give away value to the masses, which would generate lots of fans in companies big and small 

> * paid self hosted version for big companies that didn't want to send data to a 3rd party

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* paid self-hosted version for big companies that didn't want to send data to a 3rd party
```

> This worked fairly well, we started growing quickly. However, at greater we should host it for people in cloud to make money (with a big free tier since cloud is a better experience for the majority of users, and good experience leads to more word of mouth growth).

Reviewer: @jamesefhawkins I assume you mean to say "at greater scale" here?

However, the cloud would have been very competitive for us. We didn't pick it in the first place as we had a lot of unicorn competitors.

> To stand out, however, we realized we could focus on building all the products in one (we started as product analytics, but we now have also got session replay, a/b testing, feature flags, web analytics, a data warehouse, a basic customer data platform and user surveys). The key was to not try to also go upmarket so people would have simpler needs. We could not replace Snowflake in a Fortune 500, but we could provide a warehouse for a 30 person startup, with simpler needs - for example.

Reviewer: I feel like these paras (lines 135 to 144) could do with a big of a rejig. They're kind of all part of one thought, but it's a bit disordered atm – e.g. explaining why we didn't initially have a cloud product after saying we decided to launch one. It doesn't flow great atm.

> I did two things to get our very first sales:

Reviewer: of our "cloud product" I assume?

> 1. I talked to users that were already using our product and in our slack community (we've since moved away from Slack to a [custom built forum](https://posthog.com/questions)) about our paid offering and gauging interest
> 2. I created a pricing page on our website, listing out our paid extra features and embedding my calendar into it (then gradually making this self serve over time). When someone booked a call, I'd see which extra features they really cared about, and if they wanted to buy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. I talked to users that were already using our product and in our slack community (we've since moved away from Slack to a [custom built forum](https://posthog.com/questions)) about our paid offering and gauging interest.

2. I created a pricing page on our website, listing out our paid extra features and embedding my calendar into it (then gradually making this self serve over time). When someone booked a call, I'd see which extra features they really cared about, and if they wanted to buy.
```

> Unexpectedly, it turned out to be easier to get sales from people that came freshly through our website and pricing page, than it was to generate demand from the existing community. Both approaches, however, worked. I suspect adverse-selection is at play - if people see a free product, they may be using it _because_ it is free, so you'll find this is the wrong group to try to make money from even with a ton of great extra features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It turned out to be easier to get sales from people that came freshly through our website and pricing page, than it was to generate demand from the existing community. Both approaches, however, worked. I suspect adverse-selection is at play – if people see a free product, they may be using it _because_ it is free, so you'll find this is the wrong group to try to make money from, even with a ton of great extra features.
```

> When we realized that we were focusing 100% on engineers, we designed our pricing model for them. We wanted to make it something we'd appreciate (as technical people ourselves) - that meant it'd be self serve and transparent. In early pricing discussions, I negotiated ad-hoc with customers, going from "will anyone pay anything" to a consistently used internal doc, which I iterated until it felt consistently right, to a public pricing table, and finally letting people put their cards in directly to self serve. Every time we made it closer to self serve, we got a higher conversion rate. Engineers really don't want to waste time on calls or negotiating with vendors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we realized that we were focusing 100% on engineers, we designed our pricing model for them. As technical people ourselves, we wanted to make it something we'd appreciate, which meant being self serve and transparent. 

In early pricing discussions, I negotiated ad-hoc with customers, going from "will anyone pay anything" to a consistently used internal doc, which I iterated until it felt consistently right, to a public pricing table, and finally letting people put their cards in directly to self serve. 

Every time we made it closer to self serve, we got a higher conversion rate. Engineers really don't want to waste time on calls or negotiating with vendors.
```

> We started hitting app performance issues pretty rapidly, so we had to refactor the entire product from a simple Postgres backend to ClickHouse. That was painful but we had no choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We started hitting app performance issues pretty rapidly, so we had to refactor the entire product from a simple Postgres backend to ClickHouse. That was painful, but we had no choice.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> #### What we learned
>
> - Going from 100 to 1,000 users is all about zeroing in on your ideal customer profile and building everything (sales, marketing, onboarding, etc.) around their preferences.
> 
> - We adopted our transparent, self-serving pricing model around this time. This really helped boost conversion rates.
>
> ANOTHER LESSON HERE... NOT SURE WHAT 
```

No

> ## Bonus: How we got to 100,000 users - scale the business to match your demand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How we got to 100,000 users
```

As fun as that sounds - a core part of my job is making sure we don't run out of money. Alas.

We turned up and I felt a little *guilty*. The lobby had a _boat_ in it, there was a _private beach_, you could drink _infinite piña coladas_. Add those up, and I knew we were spending $100K more than we _needed_ to.

As any right-minded founder would:

1. I compartmentalized my feelings
2. I kept refreshing our revenue dashboard

Our growth had been really consistently increasing each month, and it turned out that the month of our offsite was no exception. Within ~2 days we'd increased our annual recurring revenue enough to pay for the _entire_ trip. 

> The reason this made me feel so pleased was it demonstrated the efficiency of our business model - we can literally be relaxing on a beach and making money whilst not working. Passive income baby! The reason this happens is that PostHog is a 100% inbound company - we've consistently put useful and cool stuff online (like our products or our content), and because we've done a remarkable-enough job of those things, we now just need to keep building on these to grow through word of mouth. It means we don't need people constantly cold emailing or calling to find more business.

Reviewer 3: Not sure if accuracy is super important here, but we work very hard at offsites

Author: fair, i had a similar concern, tried to word it to make this clear but it felt messy, i'll have another go

If you fast forward today, 900 companies a week now sign up to PostHog, from hobbyists to Fortune 500s.

<PUT IN GRAPH OF WEEKLY COMPREHENSIVE ORG SIGNUPS>

## Prerequisites

* If you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, go together. You are going to have to handle a literally-endless series of problems. Find a friend! 
* The ability to ship and get users for new products very fast, from scratch. If you're doing software, you must be very, very good at shipping and marketing software quickly. Frankly, this took me working at a couple of other companies first to get the hang of, it came more quickly for my cofounder.
* An [idea](https://www.ycombinator.com/library/8g-how-to-get-startup-ideas) of what to work on

## Getting to 10 users - does the product actually function

This was the hardest part.

For every stage of a startup, the earlier you are, the higher the chance of failure. With this in mind, you must be totally geared around failing fast. Hence the prerequisites above.

> So, we set off doing this... We wound up [pivoting (ie failing) five times](pivot-to-posthog) before we landed on PostHog. We met the prerequisites!

Reviewer 3: My understanding from your pivots was that you were able to build functioning products for the most part, but the issue was getting people to actually pay for them?

Author: across various pivots, we failed at:

* people barely using it once
* people not coming back to use it repeatedly
AND
* people not wanting to pay!

I'll clarify this

Marketing didn't need to be scalable to get the first 10 users. I asked my friends, only with the goal of building it _for_ someone with a real product (as we felt this would surface lots of edge cases etc, instead of us building it all locally at first).

To find _your_ friends that might be relevant, start at the top and work you way down until you get 10 people to use your product:

* whoever springs to mind first, as you likely know them the best
* go through your whatsapp / texts
* go through your linkedin, searching for people who are your first degree connections
* go through your linkedin, looking for people who've ever worked at the same places you've worked

You are unlikely to be self serve at this stage - if you are being very fast, you probably don't have the ability to create a new user without manually editing the database, so we would set people up over Slack / Whatsapp or physically with them. We did as much in person as we could.

> ## Getting to 50 users - can people self serve (if doing product led growth) and does anyone care

Reviewer 3: (Sorry I know this is still a very early draft - probably worth putting the 'product led growth' bit front and center at the top? Being able to self serve isn't relevant if I'm trying to get my first 50 compliance software customers for example)

Author: done
